📑 REVISED PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT (PRD)
Product Name: G.R.A.C.E.
Meaning: Genuinely Reliable Assistant for Command & Execution
Architecture Style: Pageless, Grid-Mapped Contextual Workspace
Target Output: Web-First SPA (Chrome/Blink optimized) $\rightarrow$ Future Native Desktop Executable via Electron
🧠 1. Product Overview & Persona
G.R.A.C.E. is a local-first, hybrid AI command center designed as a single-page fluid workspace. Traditional page navigation is entirely eliminated. The interface relies on a dynamic responsive environment where independent UI modules (Widgets) spawn, auto-position, and dismiss themselves via text or voice commands.
The Persona
Tone: Grounded, conversational, highly intelligent, and subtly witty. She acts as a capable engineering partner—devoid of corporate platitudes or aggressive sci-fi tropes.
Interaction Model: Context-dependent execution. Grace dynamically chooses whether to update the UI visually, reply purely via audio, or queue notifications depending on what the user is currently doing.
🎯 2. Core Architecture & Stack (Web-First Deployment)
To guarantee stability in a standard web browser before wrapping into Electron, the stack strictly separates client-side rendering from system execution:
Frontend Shell: HTML5, Bootstrap 5, Vanilla JavaScript (ES6+ Web Components).
Layout Engine: Gridstack.js. Manages matrix grid positioning, snapping, and layout states.
Local Backend Engine: Python + FastAPI. Runs locally on the user's loopback interface (http://127.0.0.1:8000). Handles local file reading, OS script staging, database coordination, and tiered AI routing.
Local Database: SQLite. Accessed exclusively by the FastAPI backend via an ORM/driver layer, isolating the frontend from raw SQL execution.
Intelligence Layer: Two-Tiered Hybrid Router. Fast, local keyword/regex parsing combined with the Gemini API for asynchronous deep reasoning and code synthesis.
🧱 3. The Context-Aware Widget Lifecycle & Routing System
The interaction loop handles compound inputs and heavy data streaming without blocking the UI or sacrificing user focus.
3.1 Step 1: The Two-Tiered Routing Pipeline (Input Ingestion)
When a raw string is sent via the Web Speech API or text input to FastAPI, it bypasses the cloud initially:
Tier 1 (The Fast Path): FastAPI passes the string through a local regex/keyword matrix. If obvious tokens (e.g., &quot;weather&quot;, &quot;tasks&quot;) are found, the system hits an immediate confidence score threshold ($\ge 90\%$) and moves to Step 2 within 50 milliseconds.
Tier 2 (The Intent Fallback): If the input is abstract (&quot;Will the skies ruin my plans today?&quot;), the local parser yields low confidence. FastAPI instantly commands the frontend to show a localized &quot;Thinking...&quot; state and forwards the raw text to the Gemini API to extract structural JSON intent.
3.2 Step 2: Context Evaluation (Visual vs. Auditory)
Before spawning any DOM elements, the frontend evaluates the current workspace layout state:
Scenario A (Open Workspace): The workspace is clear. Gridstack.js immediately allocates coordinates, spawns the requested widgets, and sets up Server-Sent Events (SSE) data streams.
Scenario B (Fullscreen Focus Mode): The user is actively engaging with a widget (e.g., Code Panel has window.activeFocus = true). The system is forbidden from disrupting the screen.
If the command can be answered via voice (e.g., Weather), Grace defaults to Voice-Only Modality.
If the command requires visual data (e.g., a chart), Grace suppresses the visual spawn, speaks a confirmation prompt (&quot;I have generated the chart. Say 'Maximize' to view it&quot;), and holds the widget in a background queue.
3.3 Step 3: Isolated Runtime & Safe Destructor Sequence
Each active widget communicates via its own targeted SSE channel (/api/stream/{widget_id}).
When a widget is closed via voice or UI interaction, the frontend initiates a hard teardown:
The explicit Javascript destructor function closes the specific SSE network socket.
All associated event listeners are programmatically unlinked from the DOM window object.
Gridstack.js reclaims the DOM node, forcing garbage collection to prevent memory leaks within the browser runtime.
🗂️ 4. Refactored Database Schema (SQLite)
The data layer acts as an immutable interaction log rather than a flat file cabinet, ensuring voice conversations, UI layouts, and context are fully searchable.
SQL
-- Active Core Checklist Items
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS tasks (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    title TEXT NOT NULL,
    status TEXT CHECK(status IN ('todo', 'done')) DEFAULT 'todo',
    created_at DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    due_date DATETIME
);
-- Refactored Hybrid Interaction & Context Log
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS interaction_log (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    timestamp DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    user_input TEXT NOT NULL,
    input_type TEXT CHECK(input_type IN ('text', 'voice')) NOT NULL,
    grace_response TEXT,
    response_modality TEXT CHECK(response_modality IN ('voice_only', 'widget_only', 'hybrid')) NOT NULL,
    triggered_widgets TEXT,                  -- Stored as a JSON array string: '[&quot;WIDGET_WEATHER&quot;]'
    layout_context TEXT NOT NULL               -- Active layout state: 'FULLSCREEN_CODE' or 'OPEN_GRID'
);
-- Long-Term Declarative Memory (Extracted Facts)
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS long_term_memory (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    fact_context TEXT NOT NULL,
    content TEXT NOT NULL,
    created_at DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
🔊 5. System Audio Integration & Safety Boundaries
When running in the web browser environment, audio manipulation is bounded by Web Audio API constraints until native wrappers are added.
5.1 Conditional Process Ducking (Desktop Paradigm)
Before utilizing Text-to-Speech (TTS) to deliver a voice-only response, the local Python engine polls the host operating system's audio mixer:
Communication Check: If an active process flag matches known VoIP/Conferencing signatures (e.g., Zoom, Teams, WebRTC meeting tabs), audio ducking is aborted completely. Grace stays silent and pushes a non-intrusive notification toast to the bottom of the screen.
Media Check: If only standard browser audio or desktop media players are running, FastAPI selectively attenuates those processes by 70%, executes the TTS response, and restores volume immediately upon completion.
🔐 6. System Access & Sandboxed Security Architecture
Because Grace acts as an engineering partner, security must mitigate malicious execution without inducing user confirmation fatigue.
6.1 Scoped Trust Tokens (Mitigating Confirmation Fatigue)
Terminal execution and script runs are regulated by time-bound tokens:
The first execution request of a session requires an absolute manual click or voice confirmation override.
Upon confirmation, the FastAPI backend issues a Session-Scoped Trust Token valid for 15 minutes. This token is strictly locked to that specific project working directory.
Subsequent routine execution commands within that scope bypass confirmation prompts. Any cross-directory jumps or administrative commands immediately revoke the token and trigger a lockdown prompt.
6.2 Shadow Copy & Diff Engine (Local File Protection)
Grace is physically restricted from overwriting local project files directly.
Shadowing: When a file modification is ordered (&quot;Grace, patch the error in app.js&quot;), FastAPI copies the target file into a hidden workspace folder (.grace/sandbox/).
Modification: The AI layer applies code edits exclusively to the sandboxed file copy.
The Diff View: The frontend captures the differences and renders a side-by-side, git-style visual Diff Code Workspace.
User-In-The-Loop Merge: Changes remain completely isolated until the user reviews the green/red line changes and manually clicks &quot;Apply Merge&quot; or gives the explicit voice confirmation: &quot;Grace, apply the fix.&quot;
The specification is updated and locked to reflect a secure, fast, browser-ready development roadmap.